\textbf{\textsc{The Service of}}

\textbf{\textsc{Holy Matrimony}}

\includegraphics{media/image1.jpeg}

\textbf{\textsc{Holy Trinity}}

\textbf{\textsc{Greek Orthodox Church}}

\textbf{\textsc{Fort Wayne}}

\textbf{\textsc{\hfill\break
The Service of Betrothal}}

\textbf{PRIEST:} Blessed is our God always, now and ever, and to the
ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the peace from above and for the salvation of our
souls, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the peace of the whole world, for the stability of
the holy churches of God, and for the unity of all, let us pray to the
Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For this holy house and for those who enter it with
faith, reverence, and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For our Archbishop (Name), for the honorable
presbyterate, for the diaconate in Christ, and for all the clergy and
the people, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the servant of God (Groom) and the servant of God
(Bride) who now pledge themselves to one another, and for their
salvation; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That He send down upon them love perfect and peaceful,
and give them His protection; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That He may keep them in oneness of mind, and in
steadfastness of the Faith; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That He may keep the course and manner of their life
blameless; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That the Lord God may grant unto them an honorable
marriage and a bed undefiled; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger,
and necessity, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and protect us, O
God, by Your grace.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Commemorating our most holy, pure, blessed, and
glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints,
let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For to You belong all glory, honor, and worship, to the
Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever and to the
ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O God eternal, Who has brought together into unity the
things which before had been separate, and in so doing impose on them an
indissoluble bond of love, Who did bless Isaac and Rebecca, declaring
them to be the inheritors of Your promise: do You Yourself bless these
Your servants (Groom) and (Bride), directing them into every good work.
For You are a merciful and loving God, and to You do we send up all
Glory: to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now
and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE}: Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Peace be with all.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} And with your spirit.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O Lord our God, Who espoused the Church as a pure
virgin called from out of the Gentiles, bless this Betrothal, uniting
these Your servants, keeping them in peace and oneness of mind. For to
You are due all glory, honor, and worship: to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} The servant of God (Groom) is betrothed to the servant
of God (Bride), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit. (3)

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen (3)

\textbf{PRIEST:} The servant of God (Bride) is betrothed to the servant
of God (Groom), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit. (3)

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen (3)

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O Lord our God, Who accompanied the servant of the
patriarch Abraham to Mesopotamia, when he was sent to espouse a wife for
his lord Isaac, and did reveal to him a sign by the drawing of water to
betroth Rebecca; do You Yourself bless the betrothal of these Your
servants (Groom) and (Bride) and confirm the word that has been spoken
by them; for You, O Lord, from the beginning have created male and
female, and by You is a woman joined to a man for assistance and for the
continuation of the human race. Therefore, O Lord God, Who have sent
forth Your truth to Your inheritance and Your promise to Your servants,
our fathers, who were Your elect, do You give regard unto this Your
servant (Groom) and Your servant (Bride), and seal their betrothal in
faith, in oneness of mind, in truth and in love. For You, O Lord, have
declared that a pledge is to be given and held inviolate in all things.
By a ring Joseph was given might in Egypt; by a ring Daniel was exalted
in Babylon; by a ring the truth of Thamar was made manifest; by a ring
our heavenly Father showed compassion upon His prodigal son, for He
said, "Put a ring upon his right hand, kill the fatted calf, and let us
eat and rejoice." Your own right hand, O Lord, armed Moses in the Red
Sea. Yea, by the word of Your truth were the Heavens established and the
earth set upon her sure foundations; and the right hands of Your
servants shall be blessed by Your mighty word, and by Your uplifted arm.
Wherefore, O Sovereign Lord, do You Yourself bless this putting on of
rings with Your heavenly benediction; and may Your Angel go before them
all the days of their life. For You are He that blesses and sanctifies
all things, and to You do we send up Glory: to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{\textsc{The Service of Holy Matrimony}}

\textbf{PRIEST:} Blessed are all who fear the Lord, who walk in His
ways.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} You shall eat the fruits of your labor; you are
blessed, and it shall be well with you.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Your wife shall be like a vine, prospering on the sides
of your house; your children like newly planted olive trees around your
table.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Behold, so shall the man be blessed who fears the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} May the Lord bless you from Zion, and may you see the
good things of Jerusalem all the days of your life.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} May you see your children's children. Peace be upon
Israel.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit, now and forever and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE}: Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the peace from above and for the salvation of our
souls, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the peace of the whole world, for the stability of
the holy churches of God, and for the unity of all, let us pray to the
Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} For this holy house and for those who enter it with
faith, reverence, and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} For (episcopal rank) (name), for the honorable
presbyterate, for the diaconate in Christ, and for all the clergy and
the people, let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} For the servants of God (Groom) and (Bride), who are
now being joined to one another in the community of Marriage, and for
their salvation; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That this marriage may be blessed as was that of Cana
of Galilee; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That there may be given unto them soberness of life,
and fruit of the womb as may be most expedient for them; let us pray to
the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That they may rejoice in the beholding of sons and
daughters; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That there may be granted unto them the happiness of
abundant fertility, and a course of life blameless and unashamed; let us
pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That there may be granted unto them and unto us all
prayers that tend unto salvation; let us pray to the Lord

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} That both they and we may be delivered from
tribulation, wrath, danger, and necessity; let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and protect us, O
God, by Your grace.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord have mercy

\textbf{PRIEST:} Commemorating our most holy, pure, blessed, and
glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints,
let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For to You belong all glory, honor, and worship, to the
Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and forever and to the
ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O God most pure, Author of all creation, Who through
Your man-befriending love transformed a rib of Adam the forefather into
a woman, and blessed them and said, "Increase and multiply, and have
dominion over the earth," and, by the conjoining, declared them both to
be one member, for because of this a man shall forsake his father and
his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and the two shall be one
flesh-and whom God has joined together let not man put asunder; Who did
also bless Your servant Abraham, and opened the womb of Sara, and made
him the father of many nations; Who bestowed Isaac upon Rebecca, and
blessed her offspring; Who joined Jacob and Rachel, and from them made
manifest the twelve patriarchs; Who yoked Joseph and Asenath together,
and as the fruit of generation did bestow upon them Ephrem and Manasse;
Who accepted Zacharias and Elizabeth, and declared their offspring the
Forerunner; Who out of the root of Jesse, according to the flesh,
produced the Ever-Virgin Mary, and from her were Incarnate-born for the
salvation of the human race; Who through Your unspeakable Grace and
plentiful goodness were present in Cana of Galilee, and blessed the
marriage there, that You might show a lawful union, and a generation
there from, is according to Your Will; do You Yourself, O Most Holy
Master, accept the prayer of us, Your servants; and as You were present
there, be present also here with Your invisible protection. Bless this
marriage and grant unto these Your servants (Groom) and (Bride) a
peaceful life, length of days, chastity, love for one another in a bond
of peace, offspring long-lived, fair fame by reason of their children,
and a crown of glory that does not fade away. Account them worthy to see
their children's children. Keep their wedlock safe against every hostile
scheme; give them of the dew from the Heavens above, and of the fatness
of the earth. Fill their houses with bountiful food, and with every good
thing, that they may have to give to them that are in need, bestowing
also on them that are here assembled with us all their supplications
that are unto salvation. For a God of mercy and of compassion, and of
man-befriending love are You, and to You do we send up Glory: as to Your
eternal Father and Your All-Holy, Good, and Life-creating Spirit, both
now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Blessed are You, O Lord our God, Holy Celebrant of
mystical and pure marriage, Maker of the laws that govern earthly
bodies, Guardian of incorruption, Kindly protector of the means of life:
do You Yourself now, O Master, Who in the beginning created man, and
appointed him as the king of creation, and said, "It is not good for man
to be alone upon the earth; let us make a helpmate for him"; then,
taking one of his ribs, made woman, whom when Adam saw, he said, "This
is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, for she was taken out of
her man. For this cause shall a man forsake his father and his mother,
and cleave unto his wife, and two shall be one flesh," and "whom God has
joined together, let no man put asunder." And now, O Master, Lord our
God, send down Your heavenly Grace upon these Your servants, (Groom) and
(Bride), and grant unto this woman to be in all things subject unto the
man, and to this Your servant to be at the head of the woman that they
live according to Your Will. Bless them. O Lord our God, as you blessed
Abraham and Sarah. Bless them, O Lord our God, as You blessed Isaac and
Rebecca. Bless them, O Lord our God, as you blessed Jacob and all the
Prophets. Bless them, O Lord our God, as You blessed Joseph and Asenath.
Bless them O Lord our God, as You blessed Moses and Zipporah. Bless
them, O Lord our God, as You blessed Joakim and Anna. Bless them, O Lord
our God, as You blessed Zacharias and Elizabeth. Preserve them, O Lord
our God, as You preserved Noah in the Ark. Preserve them, O Lord our
God, as You preserved Jonah in the jaw of the sea beast. Preserve them,
O Lord our God, as You preserved the holy Three Children from the fire,
when You sent down upon them the dew of the Heavens. And may that joy
come upon them which the blessed Helen had when she found the Precious
Cross. Remember them, O Lord our God, as You remembered Enoch, Shem, and
Elias. Remember them, O Lord our God, as You remembered Your holy Forty
Martyrs, sending down upon them the crowns from the Heavens. Remember
them, O Lord our God, and the parents who have reared them, for the
prayers of parents confirm the foundation of houses. Remember, O Lord
our God, the wedding company that here have come together, to be present
at this rejoicing. Remember, O Lord our God, Your servant (Groom) and
Your servant (Bride), and bless them. Give to them fruit of the womb,
fair children, concord of soul and body. Exalt them as the cedars of
Lebanon, and as well-cultured vine; bestow on them a rich store of
sustenance, so that having a sufficiency of all things for themselves,
they may abound in every good work that is good and acceptable before
You. Let them behold their children's children as newly planted olive
trees round about their table; and, being accepted before You, let them
shine as stars in the Heavens, in You, our Lord, to Whom are due all
Glory, honor, and worship as to Your eternal Father, and Your All-Holy,
Good, and Life-creating Spirit, both now and ever, and to the ages of
ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Holy God, Who fashioned man from the dust, and from his
rib fashioned woman, and joined her to him as a helpmate for him, for it
was seemly unto Your Majesty for man not to be alone upon the earth, do
You Yourself, O Sovereign Lord, stretch forth Your hand from Your holy
dwelling place, and join together this Your servant (Groom) and Your
servant (Bride), for by You is a wife joined to her husband. Join them
together in oneness of mind; crown them with wedlock into one flesh;
grant to them the fruit of the womb, and the gain of well favored
children. For Yours is the dominion, and Yours is the Kingdom, and the
Power, and the Glory: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, both now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} The servant of God (Groom) is crowned for the servant
of God, (Bride), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit. (3)

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen (3)

\textbf{PRIEST:} The servant of God (Bride) is crowned for the servant
of God, (Groom), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit. (3)

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen (3)

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord our God, crown them with glory and honor.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us be attentive.

\textbf{READER:} You placed a crown of precious stones on their heads.
They asked You for life, and You gave it to them, length of days.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Wisdom.

\textbf{READER:} The reading is from Saint Paul's Letter to the
Ephesians.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us be attentive.

\textbf{READER:} Brethren, always for everything give thanks in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father. Be subject to one another
out of reverence for Christ. Wives, be subject to your husbands, as to
the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head
of the church, his body, and is himself its Savior. As the church is
subject to Christ, so let wives be also subject in everything to their
husbands. Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave
himself up for her, that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by
the washing of water with the word, that he might present the church to
himself in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she
might be holy and without blemish. Even so husbands should love their
wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself For no
man ever hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ
does the church, because we are members of his body. "For this reason a
man shall leave his father and his mother and shall be joined to his
wife, and the two shall become one." This is a great mystery, and I take
it to mean Christ and the church; however, let each one of you love his
wife as himself, and let the wife see that she respects her husband.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Peace be with you.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} And with your spirit. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Wisdom. Arise. Let us hear the Holy Gospel. Peace be
with you all.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} And with your spirit.

\textbf{PRIEST:} The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to Saint
John.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us be attentive. At that time there was a marriage
at Cana in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there; Jesus also was
invited to the marriage, with his disciples. When the wine failed, the
mother of Jesus said to him, "They have no wine." And Jesus said to her,
"O woman, what have you to do with me? My hour has not yet come." His
mother said to the servants, "Do whatever he tells you." Now six stone
jars were standing there, for the Jewish rites of purification, each
holding twenty or thirty gallons. Jesus said to them, "Fill the jars
with water." And they filled them up to the brim. He said to them, "Now
draw some out, and take it to the steward of the feast." So they took
it. When the steward of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and
did not know where it came from (though the servants who had drawn the
water knew), the steward of the feast called the bridegroom and said to
him, "Every man serves the good wine first; and when men have drunk
freely, then the poor wine; but you have kept the good wine until now."
This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee, and
manifested his glory; and his disciples believed in him.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy,
we pray You, hear us and have mercy.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Again let us pray for the servants of God, (Groom) and
(Bride), that they may have mercy, life, health, peace, safety,
salvation, pardon and remission of their sins.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For You are a merciful God Who loves mankind, and to
You we offer up glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy
Spirit, now and forever and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O Lord our God, Who in Your saving Providence did
promise in Cana of Galilee to declare marriage honorable by Your
presence, do You Yourself preserve in peace and oneness of mind these
Your servants (Groom) and (Bride), whom You are well pleased should be
joined to one another. Declare their marriage honorable. Preserve their
bed undefiled. Grant that their life together be with be without spot of
sin. And assure that they may be worthy to attain unto a ripe old age,
keeping Your commandments in a pure heart. For You are our God, the God
to have mercy and save, and to You do we send up all Glory, as to Your
Eternal Father, and Your All-Holy, Good, and Life-creating Spirit, both
now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and protect us, O
God, by Your grace.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and
sinless, let us ask the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of
our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For pardon and remission of our sins and
transgressions, let us ask the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For that which is good and beneficial for our souls,
and for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} That we may complete the remaining time of our life in
peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} And let us ask for a Christian end to our life,
peaceful, without shame and suffering, and for a good defense before the
awesome judgment seat of Christ.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Grant this, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Having asked for the unity of the faith and for the
communion of the Holy Spirit, let us commend ourselves and one another
and our whole life to Christ our God.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} And grant us, Master, with boldness and without
condemnation, to dare call You, the heavenly God, Father, and to say:

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
those who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.

\textbf{PRIEST:} For Thine is the Kingdom and the power and the glory,
of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and forever and
to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Peace be with all.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} And with your spirit.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O God, Who by Your might create all things, and confirm
the universe, and adorn the crown of all things created by You, do You,
with Your spiritual blessing, bless also this common cup given to them
that are joined in the community of marriage. For blessed is Your Holy
Name, and glorified is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PEOPLE:} I will take up the cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord. Alleluia.

O Isaiah, dance with joy, for the Virgin in the womb conceived, and she
has given birth to a son, divine and human, Emmanuel, to whom the name
Orient belongs. Him do we magnify, and the Virgin we beatify.

O holy Martyr Saints, who competed well and received the crowns of
laurel, intercede with the Lord for us, that His mercy come upon our
souls.

Glory be to You, Christ our God, the Apostles' pride and joy, exultation
of the Martyr Saints, whose proclamation was the coessential Trinity.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Be magnified, O Bridegroom, as Abraham, and blessed as
Isaac, and increased as was Jacob. Go your way in peace, performing in
righteousness the commandments of God.

\textbf{PRIEST:} And you, O Bride, be magnified as was Sarah, and
rejoiced as was Rebecca, and increased as Rachel, being glad in your
husband, keeping the paths of the Law, for so God is well pleased.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us pray to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Lord, have mercy.

\textbf{PRIEST:} O God our God, Who was present in Cana of Galilee and
blessed the marriage there, do You also bless these' Your servants, who,
by Your Providence, are joined in the community of marriage. Bless their
comings-in and their goings-out. Replenish their life with all good
things. (Here the priest lifts the crowns from the heads of the bride
and groom and places them on the table.) Accept their crowns in Your
Kingdom unsoiled and undefiled; and preserve them without offense to the
ages of ages.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Peace be with you all.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} And with your spirit.

\textbf{PRIEST:} Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} To You, O Lord.

\textbf{PRIEST:} The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; the All-Holy,
Consubstantial and Life-creating Trinity; One Godhead and Kingdom; bless
you; grant to you long life, well-favored children, progress in life and
in Faith; replenish you with all the good things of the earth, and count
you worthy of the promised blessings, through the intercessions of the
holy Theotokos, and of all the Saints.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{\textsc{Dismissal}}

\textbf{PRIEST:} Glory to You, our God. Glory to You. May He, who by His
presence in Cana of Galilee declared marriage to be honorable, Christ
our true God, through the intercessions of His all-pure Mother, of the
holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy Apostles, of the holy, God-crowned
and Equal-to-the-Apostles Constantine and Helen, of the Holy, great
Martyr Procopios, and of all the holy Saints, have mercy on us and save
us, as our good and loving Lord.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen

\textbf{PRIEST:} Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus
Christ, our God, have mercy on us and save us.

\textbf{PEOPLE:} Amen
